---
url: https://medium.com/@evertheoptimist/3cea3d0973de
srcurl: https://talk.collegeconfidential.com/t/my-diagnosis-of-advanced-cancer-how-to-help-my-kids/1013554/958
title: How To Fight a Guerilla War With a Wife and a Mistress On Your Side
subtitle: 5/18/12
slug: how-to-fight-a-guerilla-war-with-a-wife-and-a-mistress-on-your-side
description: 
tags: cancer
author: Hyeon Lee
username: evertheoptimist
postdate: 2019-04-28
date: 2012-05-18
---

# How To Fight a Guerilla War With a Wife and a Mistress On Your Side

5/18/12

It’s been 17 month since I was diagnosed with very advanced stage cancer. During this time, I had a major surgery and near non stop cancer treatment with a short remission last summer. Treatment for my recurrence that started last September so far can be considered both a success and a failure. A success in that the cancer did not spread like a wildfire and I am still healthy otherwise — a funny thing to say, but nevertheless true since I feel well and energetic enough most of the time to do most of the things I want to do. A failure in that after eight months of treatment, I have not been able to achieve another remission. Furthermore, I have by now failed three treatments in rapid succession (including the latest one I started only a little over a month ago). On the book, this puts me in the category of very high risk patients with poor prognosis going forward. Statistically speaking, just having a recurrence after such a short remission pegs your life expectancy at 12–18 months let alone failed treatment for recurrence. Indeed, some patients whose profile mirrors mine closely have been more or less given up by their physicians. According to them, I should be writing my own eulogy by now. Or, planning my own funeral. “Doing events” has never been my forte, but I love writing, and I believe I am better at it than Amir. So, given a choice, I would rather write my eulogy than orchestrate a perfect funeral. Yet, neither I nor Dr. Sabbatini feels this is in the cards anytime soon. I have managed to completely delude myself into thinking that I can hang around long enough, hobbling or not. I am still stubbornly clinging to the myth that cancer has been a net positive force in my life — so far, that is. Ask me again when and if I can barely get out of bed.

Throughout last year and half, I have learned a lot about myself. At the risk of sounding like I am patting my own back, I would say, so far, I have handled my adversity well enough –I certainly did neither fall apart nor bury my head in sand in denial. Everybody has a different coping strategy. Mine involves a heavy dose of objectification and detachment when it comes to treatment decisions and disease management. I try to treat it as a business problem to solve — or, alternately a research project. This helps me understand what it is I am dealing with, and which course of action gives me the highest probability of marginal improvement in the situation at hand. My attitude has been — -“consistently make a decision that will produce the best marginal gain at any given moment. Cumulatively, this brings the best long term odds”. In order to do that, I must ensure that my judgment is not clouded by my emotional response to the situation.

So, I turned my medical condition into a research project just like what I used to run when I was getting my Ph.D. and a business problem to solve just like when I was running a large scale business with hundreds of millions of dollars (and more!) at stake. Based on everything I read and researched, I feel that I have a lot of options, but it requires a well thought out strategy. Dealing with cancer with my trajectory is more of an art than science as there is no clear, standard protocol with proven success. The “art” in this case, is that of a finely tuned strategy of fashioning an acceptable balance between the risk and the reward.

Having a lot of options is not same as having infinite options. Since the recurrence last September, my attitude about managing my treatment options has gone through a phase of major adjustment. When I was going through the front line therapy after the surgery, there was a hope that maybe I will be the lucky one with very long remission — — near permanent remission. For that remote possibility, I was willing to give it all I’ve got. Hit it hard and maybe I will emerge victorious forever. A carpet bombing strategy is what I pursued. Nonstop weekly chemo of harsh drugs — rain or shine! I earned my remission, and I thought it was mine to keep. Alas, it was not to be. The enemy went underground, and popped up again when my guard was down. Since then, it has been two steps forward one step back. Then, one step forward and two steps back. Realistically, the odds of me getting into remission and staying there for a long time are exceedingly low. The most likely scenario of my long term survival means coexistence with cancer, not eradication of cancer. I realize now that I am engaged in a guerilla war against an intransigent enemy adapted to sustain itself indefinitely and oh, I have the civilian population living in a conflict zone I must protect. Indiscriminate carpet bombing is no longer a viable strategy. It creates a tremendous collateral damage and no lasting results. Now, I need to find a way to hold the enemy at a bay till reinforcement arrives in the form of a penicillin equivalent for cancer, which may not happen in my lifetime, or at latest till the next airdrop of critical supplies in the form of incremental improvement to the existing treatment protocols that may each buy me a few more years at a time. A few more years at a time for ten times are almost as good as a cure, and I will be glad to settle for that!

Under this circumstance, rules of engagement have to change. My strategy for long term survival is different than what I had a year ago. The strategy now revolves around finite resource management — finite resources being my body’s ability to withstand so many chemical assaults (chemo drugs), and the total number of drugs that I can cycle through. I cannot afford to use them all up for one glorious night of shock and awe, and killing all the civilians in the process. It is now a matter of how to deploy minimal resources that give me the most bang for the buck. How to stretch available arsenal as far and long as possible. How to provide a cover for the civilians trying to grow crops in the field for subsistence. How to deploy a stop gap measure to buy time before the next big move with guns blazing. How not to deploy heavy artillery only to shoot at rabbits and squirrels. In short, how to do it in a minimalist, sustainable fashion. This is a hard discipline since it is so against my nature. I have lived my life with a motto “nothing worth doing should be done in moderation”. I have to learn how to be moderate so that I can live longer. A hard adjustment.

Then, there is also a mundane and practical side of “living”. I remember watching a documentary about a day in the life of a refuge in a displaced persons’ camp. In the midst of deprivation and suffering, there were a wedding, a divorce, a child birth, and kids getting their lessons in a makeshift school tent. In short, a life and its essential routines and rituals have to be respected. When I had a modicum of a hope to eradicate cancer for near permanent remission, if not outright cure, attacking with everything I’ve got was the highest priority. Let’s evacuate all civilians so that I can bomb the hell out of the entire city! All other schedules and events had to be rearranged so that I could stick to the regimen without a single day of delay or deviation from the treatment protocol. It is different now. It looks like I will be living in a conflict zone for a long time. I can hold my breath only so long. Inhale… Exhale… Life’s routines and rituals must be accommodated. If I want to go on a two week vacation with my family, well, the treatment schedule has to be adjusted to accommodate that. If I have to miss a couple of weeks of treatment so that I can tend to the important life events for me and my family, so be it. I can no longer put the rest of my life on hold while I fight this war. Living in a conflict zone is now my lot, and I need to “live” as much as possible while I strive to hold the enemy at a bay. Luckily, I find this adjustment quite manageable — so far…..

With the failure of the latest treatment, I have also reached a point where I have to step outside the boundary of conventional medicine. Based on all indicators on the book, statistics for me looks exceedingly grim. I can’t fight this statistics using conventional medicine alone. It reminds me of some of the business problems I used to deal with. There are routine conundrum of garden variety business problems. You cut cost. You think of a more effective marketing scheme. You try to generate more revenue by stealing another 2% market share from your competitors. It works. Then, there are business problems that can’t be addressed in this manner. You need to redefine the business model. A radical change is perhaps necessary. This is where I am in terms of managing the cancer. At the current rate, I may be rapidly going through all the tricks in the bag of conventional medicine. Something has to change the vector of this trajectory, and the odds are poor that I will find it within a comfort zone of conventional medicine. Time to step into the wilderness. Gold prospecting, anyone?

Conventional medicine is “approved” medicine, which took, years, decades to evolve. Any new bleeding edge development on the periphery of conventional medicine will take similarly long to be approved for cancer treatment. I have seen some promising early stage trial outcomes of different treatment modalities. The problem is, I don’t have the time to wait. I need them now, and the only way to get them is to step into the wilderness outside the fort. Especially interesting are the drugs that were originally developed for different medical conditions that early stage research showed promising results for anti cancer activity. Unfortunately, many of these drugs do not have a prayer of getting approved for cancer treatment. The reason is, many of these drugs’ patent expired long time ago. No patent. No profit motive. No profit motive, no phase III clinical trials that cost anyway between $300–400M. No phase III clinical trials, no FDA approval. No FDA approval, no insurance coverage and no inclusion into the “approved” arsenal at major cancer centers. In short, these drugs can only be used as off label drugs, and most mainstream doctors are reluctant to prescribe them for a variety of reasons, not the least of which is the liability issue. FDA approval provides the doctors and their institutions a protection from medical liability suits in case the treatment did not work as intended or in case there are unforeseen side effects.

When I told Dr. Sabbatini that I would be looking into non-conventional, experimental treatment on top of the usual repertoire of cancer treatment regimen I was getting from him, he introduced me to his former colleague, Dr. C. Dr. C was a physician at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, but left to explore more experimental treatment avenues without the barrier created by the institutional guideline. So, I went to see him, and he recommended an off label drug therapy. The drug was originally developed mostly for children with a form of a genetic disorder. The drug’s patent has expired. Several early, small scale clinical trials show a great deal of promise, but due to the lack of phase III trial and FDA approval, it is off limit to most cancer patients. Very few physicians know enough about it and feel comfortable with it to prescribe it, and most cancer centers will not deal with off label drugs of this kind. Furthermore, even a generic version of the drug is very expensive and not covered by the insurance plan, and as such most patients cannot afford it even if they could get it. I have started this drug therapy a week ago on top of the regular chemo treatment I am on. There is evidence that some patients given up by their doctors went into decade long remission with the help of this drug. However, that is anecdotal evidence. There is no guarantee that it will work like that for me. Yet, I am looking at my survival strategy, and it involves managing a series of stop gap measures that will buy me a year or so at a time. Even if it just buys me enough time for my body to rest before a new round of powerful (read: toxic) treatment has to be deployed, I would say, it’s a tactical victory. If this drug does not help, then I move onto more such drugs.

Among advanced cancer patients looking for a treatment outside the boundary of conventional medicine, sharing that approach with their mainstream oncologist is a very sensitive issue. Many of them get non conventional treatment behind the back of the doctors. Likewise, they do not discuss the conventional treatment with their non-mainstream practitioner. In my case, I am very fortunate that Dr. Sabbatini and Dr. C think very highly of each other. Both know what I am doing with the other doctor, and both of them are monitoring what they are doing with me vis-à-vis what the other is doing with me, for me. This is an unusually harmonious situation I find myself in. I feel like a man whose wife and mistress happily agreed on a timeshare arrangement! Now, regarding who is the wife and who is the mistress, I will let them duke it out among themselves — I have my verdict, but it’s never a good idea to take sides!

All in all, I feel very fortunate — even in the midst of all this, I was dealt a winning hand in so many aspects, and I must honor the kindness of the universe that favored me thus by making the most of what I was given, and accept the occasional hiccups along the way with grace. So, I am somewhat contentedly and somewhat gingerly resigned to my prospect going forward — as someone who is living in a conflict zone, engaged in an ongoing guerrilla war. Oh, but I get by with a little help from my wife and mistress!
