---
url: https://medium.com/@evertheoptimist/969577946a9f
srcurl: https://talk.collegeconfidential.com/t/my-diagnosis-of-advanced-cancer-how-to-help-my-kids/1013554/958
title: The Drug of My Choice, My Comfort Food
subtitle: Email 10/25/11
slug: the-drug-of-my-choice-my-comfort-food
description: 
tags: cancer
author: Hyeon Lee
username: evertheoptimist
postdate: 2019-05-18
date: 2011-10-25
---

# The Drug of My Choice, My Comfort Food

### Email 10/25/11

Last week, I started the second four week cycle of treatment for my cancer recurrence as a clinical trial patient at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. I must admit this round of chemo treatment has not been easy, and this is saying a lot coming from someone who went through earlier in the year highly toxic 18 weekly chemo treatments without a break and without missing a beat. The new regimen consists of the main chemo drug, Doxil , infused once every four weeks, and an experimental immunotherapy drug administered weekly three times during a four week cycle. The main chemo drug part is easy. As it was the case last time, I seem to thrive on chemo infusion. The difficulty comes from the experimental immunotherapy drug. Within 5 hours of the shot, I develop severe chills and high fever (to 104 degree) on alternating cycles. It completely knocks the wind out of my sails for the next two days at a minimum. By the time I recover, it’s time again to get another weekly shot. And it goes on like this….. All this has been made more difficult by the fact that as a clinical trial guinea pig, after each immunotherapy shot and Doxil infusion, I had to stay there for 8 hours so that they can collect my blood for research purposes. By this time, I am under the full blown effects of the shot, and coming home is a major adventure.

Funny as it may sound, I am “elated” that I have severe reaction to the immunotherapy shots. During the short lived trial I joined after I went into remission aimed at recurrence prevention, I was given a different kind of experimental drug working on the immune system, and was warned of the same flu like symptoms (chills, fever, etc). Yet, I developed no such side-effects. I flunked out of this trial since the cancer came back. A rational statistician in my now screams this conclusion cannot be proven on such a flimsy data. However, I believe that there is a merit to my conjecture: interventions on the immune system all seem to work in a similar way and when they work, they do tend to create flu like symptoms.

So I am hopeful, and all the difficulties with this treatment protocol are well worth it.

However, deep down, I know that I cannot put all the “blame” of having a difficult time on this round on the harsh treatment alone. I must admit a good portion is my own doing. No, I am not going into the self flagellation mode as a certified masochist. Rather, I believe it’s an objective, should I say, detached, assessment made when I had a chance to sit back and review the situation.

I made this round more difficult by refusing all offers of help and assistance by caring friends. I made it rougher than necessary by insisting that Amir sticks to the original plan made before my recurrence was confirmed — the plan to leave to Israel for his nephew’s wedding. The original plan was, he could go there earlier, work in Google Tel Aviv office and in the evening meeting with his friends and spend more time with his family. I would join him ten days later because Jon’s first break from his college was coming up and I wanted to pick him up from Bucknell and made sure that he does not come home to an empty house. By the time he needed to commit his departure date, the treatment had already started, and we knew how severely I would react. Yet, I literally pushed him out of the door and made sure he kept the original itinerary. When the next treatment day came with him already gone, I had several offers from caring friends to accompany me to Memorial Sloan Kettering and drive me back home. I refused all that too. On the day of the treatment, I was alone, and they almost did not release me due to the chills, fever, and low blood pressure. I had to exercise maximum charm to talk them into letting me go. I told them that I was like Chinese peasant women in Pearl Buck’s stories — the breed that give birth in the morning and do the field work in the afternoon. I took the train to NJ and drove myself home. Next two days, I holed up at home, just bent out of shape, and refused to respond to offers of help or call for help.

Looking back, this whole story sounds like a comedy, if not for the fact that it is also pathetic and painful. Why did I actively create this scenario? Certainly not to score points on any competition to prove my mettle. My caring friends who offered to help would have been happy to be of assistance when I am going through a difficult time. Amir would have worried less. In short, there was nothing to be gained by such stubbornness. No winners here. I was much more amenable to receive help with grace and gratitude during my first treatment when things were so much easier on me. It absolutely makes no sense that I would refuse all help when I really needed it more than any other time.

Except it does! In a very perverse way. I am an addict. An addict who was rehabilitated through careful intervention. An addict who relapsed under extreme stress. The drug of my choice, my comfort food, is this veneer of self reliance and self sufficiency, however brittle, fragile, and illusive it may be.

The recurrence of my cancer was, and still is, very rough on me, not just physically, but primarily on an emotional level. Ninety percent of my optimistic outlook and hopeful confident demeanor is genuine. But deep down, I am shaken to the core, much more so than when I initially got a very advanced stage cancer diagnosis. Back then, I had the sense that what happened to me was a fluke — something that I could overcome with my customary discipline, fortitude, and determination. When I got into remission against odds, I felt vindicated. I thought I cracked the code. I genuinely believed that with everything I was doing with such gusto in all areas of cancer management — nutrition, exercise, supplements, strong emotional foundation and positive outlook , and a clinical trial to boot to prevent recurrence — I would emerge as an extreme statistical outlier and achieve a long term remission. Instead, I found myself in mere 3–4 months on the wrong side of the statistical curve. I have done everything within my power to be the model patient. There is nothing more left under my control that I can do to affect the outcome. I have no arrows left in my quiver and the battle has only just begun.

They used the gold standard of cancer treatment for my condition as a front line therapy earlier this year. When I recurred so soon, that treatment was no longer considered “workable” for me. Now, I am on second line of defense. What if this does not work? My remaining options would start to diminish rapidly. The odds of second line therapy working for those like me are about 20%. If this treatment fails, the odds for survival are measured in weeks (60 weeks median) not in years. I feel like a student who flunked out of a critical course and was given the opportunity to take a makeup exam. What if I fail again? Are they going to expel me? Actually I felt more like a general leading a war. The front line of defense consisting of the elite of the elite forces crumbled. Now I am deploying my very best reserve force. If this line falls, I am left with untrained peasant recruits from remote villages who see being a soldier as an escape hatch from the life of serfdom and wide eyed college kids pumped full of romantic fantasies of dying for a patriotic cause. With this motley crew, what are my odds?

Behind the cheerful and upbeat demeanor, in the dark recesses of my mind, I was afraid. I was fearful. And, I relapsed. I reverted back to my old habit of addiction. I went to the shooting gallery and got pumped full of the drug of my choice with wild abandon. The more afraid I became and the more vulnerable I felt, the more desperately I clung to this illusion of self reliance and self sufficiency. Like a wild animal, when hurt, I go to the deepest lair of my den, and hide. My instinct tells me that last thing I need is to expose myself in times of weakness. This is a hard addiction to break.

So what now? The fact that I am articulating this is not an indication that I am breaking free of my addiction. I am open about this now because I am convinced that the treatment is working and the odds are very good that I will get into remission this round also. I am incredibly in tune with my body. I can “sense” the presence and activities of the tumors.

I call it my abdominal/pelvic cancer-O-meter. This is how I knew within 3 weeks during the first treatment that it’s working. This is how I guessed (correctly) that the cancer came back before any tests and scans. This same hunch tells me that I am responding to the treatment — my cancer-O-meter is hardly registering any signal now. I cannot use the cancer antigen blood marker to gauge whether the treatment is working or not. Doxil makes that test a very unreliable indicator. I have a scan scheduled in two weeks, and I will know then whether my hunch is correct or not. I think I am on the mark. If I am not, I will have to eat my words, but that will be the least of my problems, won’t it?

So back to the question: what do I with my addiction? I can crawl out of it when I no longer feel threatened and vulnerable. But what happens when the next crisis unfolds? Will I go back to my shooting gallery? At least, now that I have identified the nature of addiction, I will be very aware of what I am doing and why. That does not mean that I will be “cured”. Awareness is a necessary condition for change, but not a sufficient one. This is something I will need to explore methodically. If I manage to “cure” myself of this malady, all of you whose contact information I have, be aware. Expect 3 AM phone calls with instructions for action items you need to do and errands you should run for me!

I would like to end this update with a dream I had the other night. Ever since my diagnosis, for whatever reason, I hardly ever dream — or should I say, I hardly ever remember my dreams. If I do dream or remember the dream, it’s always been a dream where the ending leaves no closure. Like, I am searching for something, but can’t find it. Like, I am trying to go somewhere, but I can’t find a way to do it. The other night, I dreamt that I lost precious jewel — actually two pieces — one more elaborately set than the other. I lost the first one (more elaborately set piece), but somehow I found it. Then again I lost the other one (less elaborately set one), but I found that too. Both pieces were rubies — red stones. It does not take a Freudian psychoanalyst to guess what these two pieces of jewels mean. Recovering the first piece is my remission the first time around — much more elaborate affair — with a major surgery, a huge tumor load to handle, etc. I did get into remission, didn’t I? Recovering the second piece, less elaborately set piece, signifies getting my health back second time around. The second treatment is much rougher than the first, but without the fanfare and a novelty value of the first time cancer patient status on my part — hence less elaborately set jewel. This is about the first dream I had since my diagnosis where the ending was good, that there was a closure, and I found/got what I lost/wanted. A shaman may say this is a sign of things to come (wouldn’t that be nice), but being a rational skeptic that I am, I would say, this dream reflects what I am feeling — that is, I “THINK” I will this round. I feel upbeat enough that I told Amir he should hold off on his plan to upgrade his marriage with a 21 year old blonde.
