---
url: https://medium.com/@evertheoptimist/f3b4410bf09d
title: The Judgement Day
subtitle: 
slug: the-judgement-day
description: 
tags: cancer
author: Hyeon Lee
username: evertheoptimist
postdate: 2019-05-18
date: 2011-05-23
---

# The Judgement Day

According to some fanatics, Rapture was supposed to take place last Sunday. Obviously, it did not happen, and all the sinners can now merrily continue to sin as their judgment day is far off and there will be time to repent at the last minute and be saved. I am not so lucky. Tomorrow is my judgment day. My last chemo infusion was a couple of weeks back followed by a PET scan a few days ago. Tomorrow, I will have a consultation with Dr. S, and find out whether I am in remission or not. I noticed he is not the kind of doctor who will call the patients the moment tests or scan results are available. I see the logic behind this practice. An alarming finding might be better discussed in person with ample room for clarification that will lessen the anxiety of the patient. Given how extensively metastatic my cancer was at the time of the initial diagnosis, and the suboptimal surgery outcome with a tumor the size of a big lime left behind which did not shrink in the mid chemo CT scan, odds are not in my favor. Based on everything I read and researched, a betting man should bet on some form of continuing treatment with 9 to 1 odds.

I have been thinking about what I would end up dealing with when Dr. S. walks into the room to tell me what he learned. Here are possible scenarios. The best scenario is, I am declared in remission. I now join the civilian population. Instead of being a cancer patient, I become a mental patient, perpetually paranoid about every single odd sensation and wondering whether this is a sign of recurrence or not.

The next scenario is, there is no evidence of disease progress, but the solid mass tumor is still there. I will need a further treatment. Either surgical removal of the remainder, if it is possible, or a radiation therapy. In the case of the former — the surgery, I join the rank of the recidivists, the hardened cases who could not reform their way out in the civilized world and had to be hauled back to the ward for further “reeducation”. I hear human mind can get used to anything short of a truly exceptional calamity. I wonder whether that will apply to me. May I will even get to savor the hospital food. In the case of the latter — the radiation therapy, it’s daily entertainment for 4–7 weeks. I hear it’s a lot of fun. I finally get to experience the full repertoire of cancer arsenals: cutting & sewing, poisoning and now burning. They give weekends off though. Yay, I still have time to solve the world’s hunger problem even with my busy schedule of continuing personal improvement.

The final scenario would make me stand out among my distinguished fellow classmates. It is a case of disease progression while on chemo. Though it is fairly rare for “chemo virgins”, the patients going through the front line therapy (the first chemo treatment), it does happen. Hey, I emerged as a triumphant stage 4 cancer patient in short seven months from a perfectly clean annual physical and gynecological exam. I have shown an ample potential for being truly exceptional in so many ways, so why stop now? Actually, to be honest, they call women who develop ovarian/uterine cancer with no known family history and/or genetic predisposition “sporadic” cases. I prefer “exceptional” — it makes me feel special.

Even though all the indications are, chemo “seemed” to work for me so far based on the mid chemo scan and blood work results since then, there is no guarantee that I can avoid this scenario. There are cases of women for whom chemo initially worked but became ineffective during the later treatment phase. The possible explanation is, the initial chemo killed all the cancer cells that are sensitive to the chemo drugs, and cleared the field for a different line of cancer cells that are resistant to chemo to flourish — to live long and prosper, as Tuvok would say!

If this is the case, it is truly alarming. No kidding. We now start a game of treasure hunt — except, unlike the usual variety of treasure hunt, there is no guarantee that there is a treasure hidden somewhere. The most powerful and effective combination of drugs is no longer working, so we start a random search of a new combination of drugs that might work for me and try them and see if they work. If not, repeat. I will finally know what it feels like to be a woman with a very odd body shape who can’t find the right outfit no matter what she tries on in a fashionable boutique.

The odds are, patients in this situation tend not to stay in remission long even if they manage to find drugs that work. Now, we are talking about a full time occupation as a chronic cancer patient, that is, if I am lucky, because it could very well be a very short stint. Not that I think that’s the end of the world. There are much worse fates than accumulating frequent visitor mileage points in an oncology wing. If I get enough points, do I get a few free chemos? Or, have 20 chemos and get 5 radiation free? I wonder when they are going to start a promotion. How about a Valentine special? A romantic candle lit dinner for two accompanied by a delicious cocktail of Carboplatin, Taxol, and Avastin! For those whose passion for each other cooled over the years, we will rekindle and reignite that passion with a radiation torch!

Everybody’s coping mechanism is different. Mine is detachment and black humor. Oh, I do examine my emotions and try to reflect on my innermost sentiments. But, that luxury is usually reserved for after the crisis is over. I cannot afford to be swept up by my emotion when I am in a crisis management mode. This is how I have been operating last few days. Truthfully, I am scared. Have been scared since I had the scan. If indeed my disease had been progressing last couple of months while I was on chemo, the implications can be pretty dire. I coped by mapping out all the contingency plans for each scenario. What would I do under each circumstance? What are my options and what are the factors affecting my decision? What needs to be done fast, and what can wait?

I spent most time carefully mapping out all possible actions and plans for the third scenario — that my cancer progressed while I was on chemo. Realistically, I think the most likely scenario is the one of continuing treatment for the stragglers. However, the potential ramifications are most severe for the third scenario. As such, it deserves most attention and

research. In this scenario, I do not want to waste any time in my doctor’s office, too dazed and stupefied to have an intelligent conversation about the next course of action. I need to fully engage him immediately. My doctor is the expert, but in the end, I have the final say on what is being done to me. In order to earn the right to be the final decision maker, I had to learn as much as possible about my options. I have done my research, and compiled a list of questions for all potential courses of actions Dr. S. might suggest. I have a flow chart mapped out in my head. By the end of the consultation meeting, I will leave with a clear plan for the next move, which will be executed immediately. I do not want to waste time mulling over my options, and give my cancer a nice long break to continue its territorial conquest unopposed.

I went through all scenarios, contingency plans, and options so many times over and over and over again in my head last few days, the worst scenario lost its shock value. This is precisely the point. There is something to be said about objectifying one’s own crisis. A clinical detachment helps. My husband will accompany me tomorrow to the doctor’s office. Though functionally speaking, I am entirely capable of conducting a solo performance, it will be nice to have him with me, both to celebrate with if it is a good news, and to lean on if it’s a bad news. I went through all the scenarios with him multiple times. It helps me to articulate and pre-digest the worst possible scenario with him. A rehearsal is great. A rehearsal with audience, even better. It also helps him be emotionally prepared just in case. He is not just a bystander. He will be affected as much as I, maybe perhaps more than I, by this. I want to spare him the shock.

It’s 2 AM, and I am wide awake………….. I remember reading a post on the Internet forum for ovarian/uterine cancer patients. The poster was devastated when she found a note the morning after her cancer diagnosis left by her husband. It read, “Life is too short, and I don’t want to live next few years in pain and anguish”. He sailed off to Bahamas’ in his boat — they lived on the shore in Florida. Well, so far, my husband proved to be remarkably dependable and supportive all throughout this. I couldn’t have asked for better and more supportive partner. I know he will stand by me and comfort me if the worst scenario materializes. Wait, did I notice that furtive gaze of his out in the direction of the ocean last time we were taking a walk in the marine park near home? Bahamas is far off, but Bermuda is a relatively short distance from the Jersey Shore…..


