---
url: https://medium.com/@evertheoptimist/4e8298ad1a8e
title: The Year of the Glorious Cliché
subtitle: Email to friends and family — 1/12/12
slug: the-year-of-the-glorious-cliche
description: 
tags: cancer
author: Hyeon Lee
username: evertheoptimist
postdate: 2019-05-18
date: 2012-01-12
---

# The Year of the Glorious Cliché

*Thursday, January 12, 2012*

### Email to friends and family

There is an old Chinese saying “May you live in an interesting time”, and it was not always meant to be a blessing. Actually it was frequently meant as a curse. Well, the year 2011 has certainly been very interesting for this family! And, I don’t think it was a curse in spite of everything that happened.

Thirteen months ago, I was told of something I thought I would never hear, that I have a stage 4 cancer with five year survival odds measured in a low single digit. It’s been a year of fear, desperation, hope, and ultimately love. My God, a million B class movies were made along this theme! This sounds so formulaic, fake, and cliché, it’s almost embarrassing to type these words….. I always thought that I am a bit less conventional, a bit more twisted, and passably interesting. But sometimes, the most boring cliché is truer than any dazzling, richly decorative phrases with just the right kind of psychoanalytic spice added.

Year 2012 started with both a piece of good news and a sobering news. The latest cancer antigen blood test results came out. Good. The number is still going down. It did not show a dramatic decline like last two times, but once the number is already within a normal range on the reference scale, it does not drop leaps and bounds, so it’s all good. I have a new scan scheduled on Jan 18. I wouldn’t be surprised if the scan is clean. If so, technically, I will be in remission by then if my hunch is right. If this is the case, I will be beating ten to one odds for successful treatment for a recurrence after such a short remission. But this is still a wish on my part. I won’t know till I see the scan. For women like me, it’s not a guarantee that a treatment that seemed promising at the beginning actually remains effective. Often it stops working in mid treatment, then you have to pivot again. I hope it continues to work.

The sobering news is the news of passing of a woman I got to know on the Internet site I visit to learn about the latest research findings, share our treatment experiences, and get vicarious second and third opinions by talking to other women who are going through the same thing and seeing different doctors all over the world. This woman started out with the same diagnosis three months earlier than I. She, like me, had a recurrence within four months. She failed on the Doxil treatment they put her on for recurrence — the same treatment for my recurrence that they declared to be a failure for me (though I proved otherwise later). Furthermore, she was also a Korean……… It took her only a few months from that point…….. This hits home a bit too close. I have never had so many people I got to know one way or the other (though not in person) dying on me on a regular basis. This is a constant reminder for what it is that I am dealing with. I told Amir about this, and he said, “you are hanging out with a wrong crowd”. He is right. I think I will hang out on a site for swingers….. probably much more uplifting. A world full of limitless possibilities — just think about all the factorial permutations you can come up with.

Black humor aside, even with all this, when I look back at the last 13 months, during which time, I had a major surgery and non stop weekly chemo one way or the other with an exception of a 3.5 months period of remission, and a constant dread every time I take a blood test or a scan, what I feel most acutely is how truly fortunate I am. How I have been uncommonly blessed. Yes, objectively speaking, my life as it stands now could be much better. But, I have always been a glass half full kind of a person. The Universe threw a monkey wrench on me, but it also gave me the best of everything to cope with it. At a fairly early part of this whole journey, there was a day I was particularly down. This is what I wrote then:

I must confess, for about a nanosecond, I did wonder “why me? But then, I thought, “why not me?” In fact, if there is a Cosmic Score Keeper whose mission is to keep everyone’s fate a fair and balanced deal, he would realize very fast how I have been given all the advantages in life and how unfairly fortunate I have been all these decades. Even with this disease, I have been favored by fate and fortune, and I have been given a winning hand to handle this condition with maximum odds of success while so many women have to struggle with both hands tied in the back. So, better not tip the Cosmic Score Keeper off of his mistake by letting my complaint about my current situation draw his attention to my ledger. He may feel compelled to “redress” the balance. No need to tempt fate.

I still feel this way. Even with all that happened, I am grateful for what I have. Access to some of the best medical facilities in the world. Amazing friends who stood by me and comforted me. Wonderful kids who made me happy beyond my wildest expectation by simply thriving throughout the year in spite of everything. More than anything, I am so grateful of Amir — my soulmate and my best friend. When I was diagnosed, the first thought that occurred to me was how fortunate it is that it’s me, not my husband or kids. It was not because I was so altruistic and selfless that I felt that way. It was because I genuinely felt that it’s much easier to go through this myself, rather than watch any of them do it. I can only imagine what Amir went through last year. Whatever it is, he bore it incredibly well and stayed with me and stood by me as only the best mate could have.

Everybody has her own coping mechanism. When I am in crisis, I feel deeply and intensely. I fully absorb the pain and metabolize it. Only then I can move forward. This coping strategy helped me greatly. The more I learn about this whole business of being a patient of a rare form of a stage 4 cancer, the more I realize that so much of the treatment decisions are actually art, rather than science. I believe that ultimately the patient has to be the master artist — choosing just the right hue from a confusing array of options on the palette. Especially with cancer that can aggressively move from zero to 100 miles in no time like mine, I have to anticipate all potential scenarios and prepare plans for each of them so that when a decision is needed, I can make it on the spot. Being able to maintain analytical objectivity is of paramount importance, and in order to do that, I need to fully metabolize my fear and despair first and exorcise myself of their grip on me. That means faced with a bleak scenario, I jump right into the abyss to feel the rock bottom of it in an attempt to understand it. Amir can’t afford to join me there since he has to stay closer to the ground and throw the rope in just in case I can’t claw my way back up — we can’t afford to be both down there. When I soar on account of a positive turn of an event, he can’t soar to the same height either since somebody has to stay closer to the ground and catch me when I fall — and fall I will — many times if I am lucky enough to emerge as a long term survivor by successfully managing my condition as a chronic ailment — permanent remission is practically not possible for me, realistically speaking.

All this means he can neither exorcise his own despair by allowing himself to face it fully nor luxuriate in occasional triumphs. His position is truly that of an unsung hero. And I feel daily the enormity of the gift I was given that is his love. I love him more deeply than ever before. I believe he feels the same way. That said, no man is perfect, and he certainly does not measure up to everything. He has a commitment problem. The other day, I told him “if there is such a thing as reincarnation, I would like to be with you over and over again”. He replied “Yes, I will sign the subscription form”. I asked “for eternity?” His answer “Ah…..that’s too much of a commitment. I will first sign up for seven lifetimes, and we will see how it goes from there”.

Cancer took away certain things from me, but in the end, I feel I was given more than what I lost. And, for this reason, I cannot put my cancer unequivocally on the column of “calamities”. The reality is far more nuanced. I don’t see my disease as my enemy. I see it as a hard, exacting partner I need to learn to live with for a long term. She can be fickle and devious, but I see her as someone who is susceptible to reason and persuasion, and occasionally even brings an unexpected gift of exquisite beauty, intentional or not. My realistic goal is not to vanquish her, but coexist with her. I think I can.

As the new year is beginning, I would like to sincerely thank all of you who selflessly came forward to do whatever is needed to help me get through all this. Words can’t express how grateful I am. As a best reward to all of you, I will offer this: I will do my best to get well and stay that way.

I was looking through some of the writings I have done last year, I found the following entry on the day when the biopsy and CT scan results came out for initial diagnosis. That was the darkest day of my journey. Reading this as an outsider looking in, I feel it is surreal. It feels like a lifetime ago. I have an aching sense of pity for this woman who wrote this journal entry. There is an eerie sense that that woman is me but at the same time not me. There are tens of thousands of doppelgangers of me, each frozen in their own time. That timelessness entitles them an independent story arc of their own — free of my master control. Some of these women are scared and despondent. I wish I could go back in time. I would hold each one of these fearful women and tell them things would turn out fine. If I could, I would like to let some of their angst flow through me. I would tell them, the story won’t be perfect, but it will be beautiful. That, there will be laugh, joy, hope, and yes more than anything else, love. And, I hope some years in the future, another me would want to revisit one of her doppelgangers that is me at this present time, and tell her that indeed things would work out, and that though there would be sadness, fear, and desperation at times, the tapestry that emerged eventually would tell a story of hope, joy, and love.
